**Characteristics of Java (Optional)**

Y. Daniel Liang\
Supplement for Introduction to Java Programming

Java has become enormously popular. Java's rapid rise and wide
acceptance can be traced to its design and programming features,
particularly its promise that you can write a program once and run it
anywhere. As stated in the Java language white paper by Sun, Java is
*simple*, *object- oriented*, *distributed*, *interpreted*, *robust*,
*secure*, *architecture-neutral*, *portable*, *high-performance*,
*multithreaded*, and *dynamic*. Let's analyze these often-used
buzzwords.

1.  *Java Is Simple*

No language is simple, but Java is a bit easier than the popular
object-oriented programming language C++, which was the dominant
software-development language before Java. Java is partially modeled on
C++, but greatly simplified and improved. For instance, pointers and
multiple inheritance often make programming complicated. Java replaces
the multiple inheritance in C++ with a simple language construct called
an *interface*, and eliminates pointers.

Java uses automatic memory allocation and garbage collection, whereas
C++ requires the programmer to allocate memory and collect garbage.
Also, the number of language constructs is small for such a powerful
language. The clean syntax makes Java programs easy to write and read.
Some people refer to Java as \"C++\--\" because it is like C++ but with
more functionality and fewer negative aspects.

2.  *Java Is Object-Oriented*

Java is inherently object-oriented. Although many object- oriented
languages began strictly as procedural languages, Java was designed from
the start to be object-oriented. Object-oriented programming (OOP) is a
popular programming approach that is replacing traditional procedural
programming techniques.

Software systems developed using procedural programming languages are
based on the paradigm of procedures. Object- oriented programming models
the real world in terms of objects. Everything in the world can be
modeled as an object. A circle is an object, a person is an object, and
a Window icon is an object. Even a loan can be perceived as an object. A
Java program is object-oriented because programming in Java is centered
on creating objects, manipulating objects, and making objects work
together.

Part I, "Fundamentals of Programming," introduces primitive data types
and operations, control statements, methods, and arrays. These are the
fundamentals for all programming languages. You will learn
object-oriented programming in Part II, "Object-Oriented Programming."

One of the central issues in software development is how to reuse code.
Object-oriented programming provides great flexibility, modularity,
clarity, and reusability through encapsulation, inheritance, and
polymorphism---all of which you will learn about in this book. For
years, object-oriented technology was perceived as elitist, requiring a
substantial investment in training and infrastructure. Java has helped
object-oriented technology enter the mainstream of computing. Its
simple, clean syntax makes programs easy to write and read. Java
programs are quite *expressive* in terms of designing and developing
applications.

3.  *Java Is Distributed*

Distributed computing involves several computers working together on a
network. Java is designed to make distributed computing easy. Since
networking capability is inherently integrated into Java, writing
network programs is like sending and receiving data to and from a file.

4.  *Java Is Interpreted*

You need an interpreter to run Java programs. The programs are compiled
into the Java Virtual Machine code called *bytecode*. The bytecode is
machine-independent and can run on any machine that has a Java
interpreter, which is part of the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).

Most compilers, including C++ compilers, translate programs in a
high-level language to machine code. The code can only run on the native
machine. If you run the program on other machines, it has to be
recompiled on the native machine. For instance, if you compile a C++
program in Windows, the executable code generated by the compiler can
only run on the Windows platform. With Java, you compile the source code
once, and the bytecode generated by a Java compiler can run on any
platform with a Java interpreter. The Java interpreter translates the
bytecode into the machine language of the target machine.

5.  *Java Is Robust*

Robust means *reliable*. No programming language can ensure complete
reliability. Java puts a lot of emphasis on early checking for possible
errors, because Java compilers can detect many problems that would first
show up at execution time in other languages. Java has eliminated
certain types of error-prone programming constructs found in other
languages. It does not support pointers, for example, thereby
eliminating the possibility of overwriting memory and corrupting data.

Java has a runtime exception-handling feature to provide programming
support for robustness. Java forces the programmer to write the code to
deal with exceptions. Java can catch and respond to an exceptional
situation so that the program can continue its normal execution and
terminate gracefully when a runtime error occurs.

6.  *Java Is Secure*

As an Internet programming language, Java is used in a networked and
distributed environment. If you download a Java applet (a special kind
of program) and run it on your computer, it will not damage your system
because Java implements several security mechanisms to protect your
system against harm caused by stray programs. The security is based on
the premise that *nothing should be trusted*.

7.  *Java Is Architecture-Neutral*

Java is interpreted. This feature enables Java to be
*architecture-neutral*, or to use an alternative term,
*platform-independent*. With a Java Virtual Machine (JVM), you can write
one program that will run on any platform, as shown in Figure 1.5.

Java's initial success stemmed from its Web-programming capability. You
can run Java applets from a Web browser, but Java is for more than just
writing Web applets. You can also run standalone Java applications
directly from operating systems, using a Java interpreter. Today,
software vendors usually develop multiple versions of the same product
to run on different platforms (Windows, OS/2,

Macintosh, and various UNIX, IBM AS/400, and IBM mainframes). Using
Java, developers need to write only one version that can run on every
platform.

8.  *Java Is Portable*

Because Java is architecture neutral, Java programs are portable. They
can be run on any platform without being recompiled. Moreover, there are
no platform-specific features in the Java language. In some languages,
such as Ada, the largest integer varies on different platforms. But in
Java, the range of the integer is the same on every platform, as is the
behavior of arithmetic. The fixed range of the numbers makes the program
portable.

The Java environment is portable to new hardware and operating systems.
In fact, the Java compiler itself is written in Java.

9.  *Java\'s Performance*

Java's performance is sometimes criticized. The execution of the
bytecode is never as fast as it would be with a compiled language, such
as C++. Because Java is interpreted, the bytecode is not directly
executed by the system, but is run through the interpreter. However, its
speed is more than adequate for most interactive applications, where the
CPU is often idle, waiting for input or for data from other sources.

CPU speed has increased dramatically in the past few years, and this
trend will continue. There are many ways to improve performance. Users
of the earlier Sun Java Virtual Machine certainly noticed that Java was
slow. However, the new JVM is significantly faster. The new JVM uses the
technology known as *just-in-time compilation*. It compiles bytecode
into native machine code, stores the native code, and reinvokes the
native code when its bytecode is executed. Sun recently developed the
Java HotSpot Performance Engine, which includes a compiler for
optimizing the frequently used code. The HotSpot Performance Engine can
be plugged into a JVM to dramatically boost its performance.

10. *Java Is Multithreaded*

Multithreading is a program's capability to perform several tasks
simultaneously. For example, downloading a video file while playing the
video would be considered multithreading. Multithread programming is
smoothly integrated in Java, whereas in other languages you have to call
procedures specific to the operating system to enable multithreading.

Multithreading is particularly useful in graphical user interface (GUI)
and network programming. In GUI programming, there are many things going
on at the same time. A user can listen to an audio recording while
surfing a Web page. In network programming, a server can serve multiple
clients at the same time. Multithreading is a necessity in multimedia
and network programming.

11. *Java Is Dynamic*

Java was designed to adapt to an evolving environment. New class can be
loaded on the fly without recompilation. There is no need for developers
to create, and for users to install, major new software versions. New
features can be incorporated transparently as needed.
