**Supplement: UTF in Java**

**For Introduction to Java Programming and Data Structures\
By Y. Daniel Liang**

The **writeUTF(String s)** method writes two bytes of length information
of the string **s** to the output stream, followed by the modified UTF-8
representation of every character in the string **s**. UTF-8 is a coding
scheme that allows systems to operate with both ASCII and Unicode. Most
operating systems use ASCII. Java uses Unicode. The ASCII character set
is a subset of the Unicode character set. Since most applications need
only the ASCII character set, it is a waste to represent an 8-bit ASCII
character as a 16-bit Unicode character. The modified UTF-8 scheme
stores a character using one, two, or three bytes.

Characters are coded in one byte if their code is less than or equal to
**0x7F**, in two bytes if their code is greater than **0x7F** and less
than or equal to **0x7FF**, or in three bytes if their code is greater
than **0x7FF**.

The initial bits of a UTF-8 character indicate whether a character is
stored in one byte, two bytes, or three bytes. If the first bit is
**0**, it is a one-byte character. If the first bits are **110**, it is
the first byte of a two- byte sequence. If the first bits are **1110**,
it is the first byte of a three-byte sequence. The information that
indicates the number of characters in a string is stored in the first
two bytes preceding the UTF-8 characters. For example,
**writeUTF(\"ABCDEF\")** actually writes eight bytes (i.e., **00 06 41
42 43 44 45 46**) to the file because the first two bytes store the
number of characters in the string.

***\<margin note\>***UTF-8 scheme

The **writeUTF(String s)** method converts a string into a series of
bytes in the UTF-8 format and writes them into an output stream. The
**readUTF()** method reads a string that has been written using the
**writeUTF** method.

The UTF-8 format has the advantage of saving a byte for each ASCII
character because a Unicode character takes up two bytes and an ASCII
character in UTF-8 only one byte. If most of the characters in a long
string are regular ASCII characters, using UTF-8 is more efficient.

**Â© Copyright Y. Daniel Liang**
